[Proposal] 'Features' Distribution Specification (#66)
devcontainers/spec: proposals/devcontainer-features-distribution.md

# Community Contribution and Discovery of Dev Container Features

This specification defines a pattern where community members and organizations can author and self-publish [dev container 'features'](./devcontainer-features.md). 

Goals include:

- For community authors, a "self-served" mechanism for dev container feature publishing.

> - For community members, the ability to publish features, thus allowing  [supporting tools](../docs/specs/supporting-tools.md) to implement their own discovery mechanisms.

Reviewer: I thought publishing features would fall under community authors, and searching for published features (i.e. through the mechanisms supporting tools implement) would be fore community members.

Author: Perhaps I just remove the 2nd bullet point here?  I wanted to illustrate that this spec is for _publishing_ assets for distribution, which will enable additional functionality outside this specification to aid in discovery

- For users, the ability to validate the integrity of previously fetched assets. 
- For users, the ability for a user to pin to a particular version (absolute, or semantic version) of a feature to allow consistent, repeatable environments.

## Source Code

Features source code is stored in a git repository.

For ease of authorship and maintenance, [1..n] features can share a single git repository.  This set of features is referred to as a collection, and will share the same [`devcontainer-collection.json`](#devcontainer-collection.json) file and 'namespace' (eg. `<owner>/<repo>`).

Source code for the set follows the example file structure below:

```
.
├── README.md
├── src
│   ├── dotnet
│   │   ├── devcontainer-feature.json
│   │   ├── install.sh
│   │   └── ...
|   ├
│   ├── go
│   │   ├── devcontainer-feature.json
│   │   └── install.sh
|   ├── ...
│   │   ├── devcontainer-feature.json
│   │   └── install.sh
├── test
│   ├── dotnet
│   │   ├── test.sh
│   │   └── ...
│   └── go
│   |   └── test.sh
|   ├── ...
│   │   └── test.sh
├── ...
```

> Where `src` is a directory containing a sub-folder with the name of the feature (e.g. `src/dotnet` or `src/go`) with at least a file named `devcontainer-feature.json` that contains the feature metadata, and an `install.sh` script that implementing tools will use as the entrypoint to install the feature.  Each sub-directory should be named such that it matches the `id` field of the `devcontainer-feature.json`.  Other files can also be included in the feature's sub-directory, and will be packaged along side the two required files.  Any files that are not part of the feature's sub-directory (e.g. outside of `src/dotnet`) will not be packaged.

Reviewer 2: I think here we either mention that there will be an action implementing the behavior or change the wording to 'should be packaged' and 'will not be packaged'.

Author: Added a reference to the #packaging section of this doc.

> Where `src` is a directory containing a sub-folder with the name of the feature (e.g. `src/dotnet` or `src/go`) with at least a file named `devcontainer-feature.json` that contains the feature metadata, and an `install.sh` script that implementing tools will use as the entrypoint to install the feature.  Each sub-directory should be named such that it matches the `id` field of the `devcontainer-feature.json`.  Other files can also be included in the feature's sub-directory, and will be packaged along side the two required files.  Any files that are not part of the feature's sub-directory (e.g. outside of `src/dotnet`) will not be packaged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Where `src` is a directory containing a sub-folder with the name of the feature (e.g. `src/dotnet` or `src/go`) with at least a file named `devcontainer-feature.json` that contains the feature metadata, and an `install.sh` script that implementing tools will use as the entrypoint to install the feature.  Each sub-directory should be named such that it matches the `id` field of the `devcontainer-feature.json`.  Other files can also be included in the feature's sub-directory, and will be packaged alongside the two required files.  Any files that are not part of the feature's sub-directory (e.g. outside of `src/dotnet`) will not be packaged.
```

Tooling that handles publishing features will not republish features if that exact version has already been published; however, tooling must republish major and minor versions in accordance with the semver specification.

## Packaging

Features are distributed as tarballs.  The tarball contains the entire contents of the feature sub-directory, including the `devcontainer-feature.json`, `install.sh`, and any other files in the directory.

The tarball is named `devcontainer-feature-<id>.tgz`, where `<id>` is the feature's `id` field.

A reference implementation for packaging and distributing features is provided as a GitHub Action (https://github.com/devcontainers/action).

### devcontainer-collection.json

The `devcontainer-collection.json` is an auto-generated metadata file.

| Property | Type | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| sourceInformation | object | Metadata from the implementing packaging tool. |
| features | array | The list of features that are contained in this collection.|

> <!-- | templates | array | The list of templates contained in this collection. Same information as the metadata file for the definition.| -->

Reviewer 2: nit: remove commented line and extra line.

Each features's `devcontainer-feature.json` metadata file is appended into the `features` top-level array.

## Distribution

There are several supported ways to distribute features.  Distribution is handled by the implementing packaging tool.

A user references a distributed feature in a `devcontainer.json` as defined in ['referencing a feature'](./devcontainer-features.md#Referencing-a-feature).

### OCI Registry

An OCI registry that implements the [OCI Artifact Distribution Specification](https://github.com/opencontainers/distribution-spec) serves as the primary distribution mechanism for features.

> Each packaged feature is pushed to the registry following the naming convention `<registry>/<namespace>/<id>[:version]`, where version is the major, minor, and patch version of the feature, according to the semver specification.

Reviewer 2: Should we also mention here that namespace should be composed of 'owner/repo' like mentioned bellow?

I think we actually need it to validate the publisher right?

Author: I omitted defining `namespace` since that isn't a hard requirement for all OCI registries (or even for GHCR - all we need is the owner at the front)

Author: Added a note

```bash
# ghcr.io/devcontainers/features/go:1 
REGISTRY=ghcr.io
NAMESPACE=devcontainers/features
FEATURE=go

ARTIFACT_PATH=devcontainer-feature-go.tgz

for VERSION in 1  1.2  1.2.3  latest
do
    oras push ${REGISTRY}/${NAMESPACE}/${FEATURE}:${VERSION} \
            --manifest-config /dev/null:application/vnd.devcontainers \
                             ./${ARTIFACT_PATH}:application/vnd.devcontainers.layer.v1+tar
done

```

`Namespace` is the globally identifiable name for the collection of features. (eg: `owner/repo` for the source code's git repository).

The auto-generated `devcontainer-collection.json` is pushed to the registry with the same `namespace` as above and no accompanying `feature` name. The collection file is always tagged as `latest`.

```bash
# ghcr.io/devcontainers/features
REGISTRY=ghcr.io
NAMESPACE=devcontainers/features

oras push ${REGISTRY}/${NAMESPACE}:latest \
        --manifest-config /dev/null:application/vnd.devcontainers \
                            ./devcontainer-collection.json.:application/vnd.devcontainers.layer.v1+json
```

> ### Directly Reference Tarball

Reviewer 2: Should we also add local features here? It seems weird to not mention it, probably just a note that local features also exist and to see the features reference.

Author: good call out, will mention briefly (Since I suppose it's not _distribution_ per say, but still a very relevant

# Community Contribution and Discovery of Dev Container Features

This specification defines a pattern where community members and organizations can author and self-publish [dev container 'features'](./devcontainer-features.md). 

Goals include:

- For community authors, a "self-served" mechanism for dev container feature publishing.
- For community members, a largely self-served mechanism for marking features as "discoverable" by [supporting tools](../docs/specs/supporting-tools.md).

> - For users, ease of discoverability of features via [supporting tools](../docs/specs/supporting-tools.md).

Reviewer 3: Curious, how would they discover features with the `supporting tools` ? 
I thought the users can consume these features with the `supporting tools`

Author: I will rephrase

> - For users, the abilty to validate the origin of the asset and its integrity when compared to previous pulls. 

Author: agreed

- For users, the ability for a user to pin to a particular version (absolute, or semantic version) of a feature to allow consistent, repeatable environments.

## Source Code

Features source code is stored in a git repository.

> For ease of authorship and maintenance, [1..n] features can share a single git repository.  This set of features is referred to as a collection, and will share the same [`devcontainer-collection.json`](#devcontainer-collection.json) file and 'namespace' (eg. `owner/repo`).

Reviewer 3: nit: `<owner>/<repo>`

(I perceived `owner/repo` as `owner` or `repo`)

Source code for the set follows the example file structure below:

```
.
├── README.md
├── src
│   ├── dotnet
│   │   ├── devcontainer-feature.json
│   │   ├── install.sh
│   │   └── ...
|   ├
│   ├── go
│   │   ├── devcontainer-feature.json
│   │   └── install.sh
|   ├── ...
│   │   ├── devcontainer-feature.json
│   │   └── install.sh
├── test
│   ├── dotnet

> │   │   ├── devcontainer-feature.json

Author: That was a typo, thanks :)

│   │   └── ...
│   └── go
│   |   └── test.sh
|   ├── ...
│   │   └── test.sh
├── ...
```

> Where `src` is a directory containing a sub-folder with the name of the feature (e.g. `dotnet` or `go`) with at least a file named `devcontainer-feature.json` that contains the feature metadata. Each feature sub-directory also contains an `install.sh` script that implementing tools will use to install the feature.  Each sub-directory should be named such that it matches the `id` field of the `devcontainer-feature.json`.  Other files can also be included in the sub-directory, and will be packaged along side the two required files.

Reviewer 3: If a feature (say `src/dotnet`) is trying to execute a file (`src/helper.sh`) which is not inside the feature's directory (`src/dotnet`), then I believe that's not (currently) acceptable and won't work?  

The highlighted line implicitly points that, but do we want to explicitly mention?

```bash
# ghcr.io/devcontainers/features/go:1 
REGISTRY=ghcr.io
NAMESPACE=devcontainers/features
FEATURE=go

ARTIFACT_PATH=devcontainer-feature-go.tgz

for VERSION in 1  1.2  1.2.3  latest
do
    oras push ${REGISTRY}/${NAMESPACE}/${FEATURE}:${VERSION} \
            --manifest-config /dev/null:application/vnd.devcontainers \
                             ./${ARTIFACT_PATH}:application/vnd.devcontainers.layer.v1+tar
done

```

`Namespace` is the globally identifiable name for the collection of features. (eg: `owner/repo` for the source code's git repository).

The auto-generated `devcontainer-collection.json` is pushed to the registry with the same `namespace` as above and no accompanying `feature` name. The collection file is always tagged as `latest`.

```bash
# ghcr.io/devcontainers/features
REGISTRY=ghcr.io
NAMESPACE=devcontainers/features

oras push ${REGISTRY}/${NAMESPACE}:latest \
        --manifest-config /dev/null:application/vnd.devcontainers \
                            ./devcontainer-collection.json.:application/vnd.devcontainers.layer.v1+json
```

### Directly Reference Tarball

> A feature can be referenced directly in a `devcontainer.json` file by an HTTP URI that points to the tarball from the [package step](#packaging).

Reviewer 3: Should we be more precise? 

`.devcontainer.json` (or `.devcontainer/devcontainer.json`)

Author: I will link to https://github.com/devcontainers/spec/blob/main/docs/specs/devcontainer-reference.md#devcontainerjson for completeness

> A feature can be referenced directly in a `devcontainer.json` file by an HTTP URI that points to the tarball from the [package step](#packaging).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A feature can be referenced directly in a .devcontainer.json (or .devcontainer/devcontainer.json) file by an HTTP URI that points to the tarball from the [package step](#packaging).
```

Author: updated above.
